so Python provides two different ways to
loop around the block of code with for
loops and while now we’ve seen how a for can be used to iterate through
an iterable so either the items in a
sequence or the numbers in a range but
sometimes we actually need to
keep looping as long as some condition
is true and then stop when it becomes
false, now we do this using a while loop, so
the basic format of while loop is just a while and
some condition colon and execute a block
of code let's just look at an example of
a for loop we have done earlier in this section
and in contrast that to while loop, so
start off by typing
and we can run that, again we’ve seen that code in this section
nothing new there, i is now 0 through to 9 as you can see, because we use the range 10 so that's a for loop now with a
while loop we can produce the same results so what what we can do is i’ll just comment that code out
and we do something like
same thing same placement field format, and so if we run that
to confirm thats the same
we get exactly the same result that we got in the for loop, you probably wouldn't use a while loop just to
iterate through a range of values like
we’ve done here but this does give you a
good example to see what's actually
going so the first thing to note here is
the condition on line 4 i < 10
well that controls execution of the block of code
in the loop which is the code
on lines five and six so in
other words as long as i is less than 10
then code on lines 5 and 6 is going to be executed but once it becomes equal to or greater than
10 the condition becomes false and the loops terminates, in other words there no more processing and you saw that
because when i was less than 10, is now 9 and
we automatically skipped that point and that was the end but these leads to two other important points to
consider here, one first the condition
must be initialized before the loop starts of
you saw me do that on line 3 when initialised i to the value of 0, now with
the for loop of course we just set i without setting the value first and that's because python knows that
to give it the first value from the
range and to continue from there but with a
while loop we had to give i a value first if we didn't get an error that is not defined so thats another
distinction that you have to do when
using while loops but the
second thing that is important here is we we need
some way within the loop for the
condition to become false so just to show you what I mean if we remove this, we remove the
indent, put them back to the left
hand side so as its no longer indented, and we run that
you can see we got a loop happening on the right hand
side the code is being executed and
I'll just stop that you could see there
was no way for the condition to become
false in other words there was no way
to exit because i was never been incremented
so this condition would forever stay true, will
always have i less than 10 in that
situation and you saw an example here to
the right that I was always 0 so consequently we can never have a false
condition so the loop’s kept looping
infinitely and just out of interest if
you want to do that we decided we wanted
to leave infinitely we could have to
done while true and run it, we will
achieve the same results you can see
there, i’ll stopped that now, now there are some
scenarios that you'll see loops that just use
true as a condition but the body of the
loop then contains a way to break out of
the loop, you can see in this scenario, and i’ll just undo the working example we had,  so you can see that why
for loop is preferable in this particular and it will be very rare to see a while loop
use like that because frankly there's
more work more code effectively got four
lines of code they're doing what two lines of
the for loop of the lines 1 and 2, but there
are many reasons for looping around the
block of code that don't involve just
going through items in a sequence which we did in this case so for example in an
adventure game players to have choose a
direction
in order to exit from a location, now if they don't choose one of the available exits
they stay where they are and thats an ideal use of a while loop let's do
something that like, so will just comment
this code out and say something like
and will just initialise and empty string and then we can put
and on the next line we put, so just to confirm that lets run this, please choose a direction we can put
something like north please choose a direction
because it wasn't in the available
options you see a on line 7 we got 3 options and we
typed something like south aren’t you glad you got out of there so the interesting
things about this is we initialize the
variable chosen_exit on line 9
to set to an empty string and so that meant the
first time we started the while loop chosen_exit
wasn't in the available exits and
therefore was able to go through and asked
what the direction it was, if we had initialized that
variable to east lets say and run this you see
that the loop didn’t get process at all because the first condition while
chosen_exits not in available exits that
returned false in other words chosen
exit was unavailable exit so
consequently this line's code was skipped
altogether we just got this print out there so we initialised it on
line 9 and then it's going to keep
looping effectively until we’ve got a
valid
input, or the exit that we’ve chosen is in the list
that we define on line 7
so probably the most important feature
certainly one of the most important
features of while loops is that it can be
used in this scenario and that's where
you can’t determine in advance how many
times you actually need to loop so for
loop will repeat for each item in a
predetermined sequence whereas as you
see here in a while loop you don't need to
know ahead of time many times the legal
execute because of course in this
scenario this could continue sort of
hundreds of times until the player typed in
a direction that was on our list on line
7, so one particular application of this would
be reading data from a file now it's
difficult not impossible but certainly
difficult to know in advance how much
data is there read from a file in your computer
now the while loop can be used to keep
repeating until there's no more data left
now will see this soon when we look at file input
and output which is in a future section
on this course let's just enhance our
example a little bit because just like
with the for loop we can also use break
and continue to break out of the loop or to
cause the loop to stop the current iteration
and to test the condition again, so breaks can provide a simple way
to quit in other words without choosing
a valid exit so what we could to there is
we could do something like, now if we run that
we still got the scenario if we enter something wrong like west, that’s not going to work but if we typed quit you can see game over
was printed out and then we exited the
game with a break, so the break exited out
of the while loop in that scenario and again if we just run again to confirm that it still works with a
valid one, east, that still works, but
we probably shouldn't print the final
message if the player chooses quit , so just like a for loop we can also use
else, the one you saw in the for loop
section, so otherwise down here we can put
else, and this is going to be executed just like the for loop, if the code hasn’t been broken out in other words
a break hasn't been
processed so if we run, again will type quit, oops I put a space there, quit, we’ve now got game
over and you can see that because of the else
the statement wasn't printed and we can just put
a valid one like east, we should find it does actually show that
message on the screen, now on the early lecture on if statements if you recall
we created a very simple guessing game
that's what the player had to guess a number
between 1 and 10, know there are a
number of problems with that game one
problem was that it only allowed two
guesses if he wanted to allow more than
two guesses but we have to do, would
involved with be the nesting of more and more
if test, every time they guess it correctly was employed and the other problem was 5 was always the correct number which make the game
a bit boring not that its terribly engaging to begin with but the
first problem we talked about their can
be solved using a while loop in the other words
if we want to allow more than two guesses and
you'll be doing that in the challenge
next, but before we do that let's take digress
slowly and address the second problem to
produce a more interesting game that's because resolving the situation where
the correct number to guess was always 5 so to fix the problem the regarding correct number being 5
what we need to do is get the computer to
generate a random number in the chosen
range, from one to ten in the example
of this game but of course we can extend that
now Python has got a lot of features built in such as the ability to do
arithmetic, lists, ranges, and tuples and
of course more than that, and you’ve seen a lot of
that already as we go through the
course, and lists, iterators, etc you're going to be dealing
with in the next section so there's
enough built in fact for us to be able
to write a random number generator if
you want to do this but great news is that
one has already been written for us and
ships with python in a module called
Python so we're gonna be looking at
creating modules and packages much later
in the course but for now what we’re gonna do is
used to one that comes with it, and because
it's an external module we need to import
it into our program using the import
statement, now don't worry too much about this now all you
really need to know to use it is as we
have to import it which tells Python
which location to grab that particular piece of code so that we can
actually take advantage of that and use
it in our
game let's now go ahead and type in that
game, I’m going to comment out this code again
like so, so instead of typing lets go ahead and
i’ll just paste in here first and
we'll go through it because it's
essentially exactly the same as the
previous game with a few extra lines of code so you can see
what I've done there so we started off
got import random, thats the
command which tells Python we want to take
advantage of this pre written code to
generate random numbers and you can see
on line 21 , first thing we started with the
highest to find a variable called
highest which is set to a value of 1 and on line 21 we got the answer which is a random
number between one and the highest
number which in this case 10 some in other
words answer should be a number between
one and 10 each time and you can see
we the modified program to also
display, put the numbers, please guess
number between one and we can put
the number and whatever however we wish
at the moment its set to highest and that means you
could change this number if you wanted to
to make that sort of twenty fifty a
hundred or whatever you want to do
and then we got the code which is essentially the
same as what it was before going to the guess scenario
but of course it's still a little bit limited
in that its only going to give two chances to try
it and probably in most cases you need at least 4 so lets try running this to
confirm that it works, please guess a number between 1 and 10, we can try 5
first please guess higher, 8, Sorry you have not guessed correctly, try again and of course it didn't help us
because it didn’t tell us what the number was either
try again and see what we can get lucky, five
again, please guess higher, try 8, sorry you have not guess correctly, will try one more time, 5 lower
this time, will try 3
sorry you have not guessed correctly, so you can see that the point is that
that number has now changed anyway we
had two times it said the number is
higher the second time was lower
so clearly its generating a random number each
time, but of course the game method exists is very
frustrating and the reason that it's
frustrating of course is that we only got
two chances so what we probably need is a
minute
three or maybe four guesses to be sure of getting that number correct so that's going to give
us a good challenge to try and so what
we'll do is we'll look at that challenge
in the next video